Welcome to Week 4's review
session on decision trees.
I'm Noah Gantz your instructor for
the week.
Before we get started,
I wanna point out that this review
session is completely optional.
If the decision tree concepts we
introduced in Session 1 are clear to you,
then you can skip this review and
move onto the practice problems.
After that, go ahead and
tackle week 4's homework.
However, if before trying the practice
problems, you'd like an additional look
at how to set up and analyze a decision
tree, then join me for a review.
Our review is going to use
an example from patent litigation.
The two companies involved are Cellectis
and Precision BioSciences.
Let's start with some background on
Cellectis and Precision BioSciences.
Both companies developed genomic editing
technologies, that they sell for
use in genetic engineering.
In 2008,
Cellectis sued Precision BioSciences for
patent infringement, and
the litigation ended in 2015.
Imagine now that it's 2008.
Cellectis's legal advisors
note that the litigation
process has three well established stages.
In stage 1, the court decides whether or
not Cellectis's patent is valid.
In stage 2,
if the patent has been considered valid,
then the court will determine whether or
not Precision BioSciences has
infringed on select business patent.
In stage 3,
if there had been a determination
of infringement by the court, then
the court will determine the magnitude
of the damages payable to Cellectis.
Note that if the court rules against
Cellectis, in either the first or
the second phase,
then the litigation ends.
Cellectis estimates the probabilities and
the cash flows together
with it's attorneys.
First of all,
they estimate the probabilities of
litigation advancing from
one stage to the next.
They estimate that the chance of
the patent being found valid in stage 1 or
2 and 3.
So there's a 1 in 3 chance
that it won't be found valid.
Then, given a valid patent,
they estimate the chances that
Precision BioSciences will be found to
have infringed as only 1 in 4, so there's
a 3 in 4 chance that Precision BioSciences
will be found not to have infringed.
Finally, they estimate the possible
damage awards in phase 3 by multiplying
royalty percentages by the value of
Precision BioSciences contracts.
And when they do the multiplication,
they come out with four equally
likely damage estimates.
$20 million, $30 million,
$40 million, and $50 million,
each occurs with a probability of 1/4th.
The legal team also estimates its fees for
each of the three trial stages.
It estimates $3 million dollar charge for
the first stage, patent validity.
It estimates its expenses as $5
million for the second stage,
the determination of infringement.
And it estimates a $1 million dollar
charge for the third stage, damages.
Cellectis has the following decision
problem, when moving from one
stage of litigation to the next,
if Cellectis loses at that stage,
it has to stop and pay its attorney's fees
up through that stage, and that's it.
Even if Cellectis wins at that stage,
it can decide to stop litigation,
and pay only its attorney's
fees up through that stage.
More generally, Cellectis must
decide the following, whether or
not to litigate in the first place.
That is, whether it should
sue Precision BioSciences for
patent infringement, or not.
And if it does litigate,
then after each stage it wins,
should it continue litigation, or stop?
So, we want to do two things.
First, we'd like to construct
a decision tree for Cellectis.
We wanna construct the tree with decision
nodes, event nodes, and payouts.
We also wanna write down the name and
cash flows associated with
each decision and event.
Next, for each event node, we wanna write
down the probabilities that they occur.
We wanna make sure that the probabilities
at each event node add up to one.
Then, for each payout,
we wanna use the revenues and
costs on the branches that lead up to
the payout, to calculate its value.
Having constructed the decision tree,
we then want to analyze it.
We'd like to determine Cellectis's
maxi-min set of decisions.
We'd then like to determine
Cellectis's maxi-max set of decisions.
Finally, we'd like to
determine Cellectis's
expected value maximizing
set of decisions.
And then we can compare the three.
So let's get started.
First we're going to construct the tree
with decision nodes, event nodes, and
payouts.
Remember that decision nodes are squares,
event nodes are circles, and
outcomes or payouts are triangles.
Cellectis's first decision is whether to
enter into phase one of the litigation,
whether to litigate it at all.
All right, and if it doesn't,
then it pays nothing.
On the other hand, if it does, it's going
to pay its legal team $3 million dollars.
Having decided to go into litigation, we
encountered the first event node; that's
whether the patent is found valid or not.
If its not found valid,
then litigation is over.
If it is found valid,
then Cellectis can decide whether to
proceed to phase 2 of the litigation.
At that point, it can decide to stop, or
it can decide to proceed with phase 2, in
which case it's going to pay its attorneys
an estimated fee of $5 million dollars.
Having entered into phase two,
the court will then decided whether
the patent is infringed or not.
If it's not infringed,
then the litigation ends.
If it is infringed,
then Cellectis can decide whether to
proceed into phase 3 of the litigation.
That's the damages phase.
At that point it can decide not to, or
it can decide to proceed into the damages
phase, and pay it's attorneys
an estimated fee of $1 million dollars.
In the damages phase,
there are four equally likely outcomes.
Cellectis might be awarded damages
of $50 million, $40 million,
$30 million or $20 million,
so that's the full tree.
Next, we want to decide what the
probabilities are of the different event
nodes, so let's start at the beginning,
and work towards the end.
In the first event,
whether the patent's found valid or not,
we know that there's a two-third chance
that the patent will be found valid.
And a one-third chance that
the patent will not be found valid.
So notice that those two
probabilities add up to one.
In the second litigation phase, that's
patent infringement, we know that there's
only a 1 in 4 chance that the patent will
be found to have been infringed upon.
And that leaves a three fourths chance
that the patent will not be found
to have been infringed upon.
Again, the two probabilities
add up to one.
In the final damages stage, there
are four equally likely outcomes of $50,
$40, $30 and
$20 million dollars in damages.
And each of those is going to accrue
with an equal probability, or 1 in 4.
So those are all the probabilities
in the event nodes.
At each event node they add up to one.
Finally, at each outcome we want to
determine what the payout is for
Cellectis.
To do that we're going to calculate
the payouts associated with
the various outcomes.
We're going to start at
the initial root of the tree, and
work through all the cash flows on
the branches that lead up to the outcome.
We start at the lower left,
in the litigation phase.
If Cellectis decides not to litigate,
then it pays nothing to it's attorneys.
On the other hand,
if Cellectis decides to litigate,
it's going to pay $3 million
dollars to its attorneys.
And then one of two things can happen.
It could lose phase one of the litigation
in which case it would have paid three
million and got nothing back and so the
outcome will be negative three million.
On the other hand, it may decide to
litigate and pay the three million and
then The patents found to be valid,
at that point Cellectis has a second
decision, it can decide not to proceed
with these to the patent infringement.
In which case it's paid the three
million and got nothing back, so
again the outcome is negative
three million for Cellectis.
Alternatively having initiated litigation
and found it's patent to be valid,
Cellectis may decided to continue
with litigation in phase two and
then pay an additional $5
million to it's attorneys.
At that point,
there are two potential outcomes.
The patent may be found to
not have been infringed upon.
In that case, Cellectis will have paid
the $3 million plus another $5 million or
it will have lost $8 million.
On the other hand,
it could be that the patent is
found to have been infringed upon.
At which point Cellectis has yet
one more decision.
And that is whether to engage in phase
3 of the litigation, the damages phase.
If Cellectis having won
the patent validity and
won the patent infringement phases
decides at that point to stop litigation,
it will have paid $3 million and
$5 million,
got nothing back, and
it will still have loss $8 million.
On the other hand,
if at that point Cellectis continues with
the damages phase, it will pay an
additional $1 million to its attorneys and
then face one of four
equally likely outcomes.
For example,
if the outcome is $20 million in damages,
then Cellectis will have paid three
million and five million and one million.
And received 20 million.
Or it would have a net
payout of $11 million.
That's 20 minus one,
minus five, minus three.
If the damage is at 30 million,
you can see that the payout would just
be ten million more or 21 million.
If the damages are 40 million,
it would be a 31 million dollar payout.
And, if the damages are 50 million,
it would be a 41 million dollar payout.
So now,
we've constructed our decision tree.
We've included decision nodes,
event modes, and outcomes.
Along the branches we've
written the associated payout,
the associated cash flows along the way.
At each the event nodes we've included
probabilities that sum to one and
we've calculated the net payout to
select this at each of the outcomes.
We can now move on to
analyzing the decision tree.
So now that we have
constructed a decision tree,
we want to identify three different
sets of decision strategies.
The first set are called
maxi-min decisions.
Remember that these are decisions
that maximize the minimum outcomes.
So they're a risk averse strategies and
what they're doing is they're trying to
take the worst outcomes and make sure
the worst outcome is as good as possible.
To do that we start at the end of the tree
and we work backwards towards it's root.
At each event node we choose
the minimum outcome, the worst outcome.
And then at each decision node,
we choose the decision that maximizes
the outcomes of those decisions.
So let's take a look.
Here's our tree.
We're gonna start up the first node
at the end is the event node so
we're going to select
the minimum [COUGH] outcome.
And you can see that, that's 11 million,
we'll substitute the event
node with the 11 million.
And now there's a decision for
Cellectis to make.
And that is does it proceed
to phase three in litigation.
And it's gonna choose the decision
that maximizes the outcome.
In this case it's the 11 million.
So yes, Cellectis is going to choose to
enter interface re-litigation
if it makes it that far.
And so it will choose the litigation and
will replace the decision
node with the 11 million.
We're back to an event node, and
again we're going to select
the minimum event outcome.
Here that would be if Cellectis
loses phase two of the litigation.
That is, if the patent's determined
not to have infringed, in which case,
it will have lost $8 million and
we'll substitute that for
the event node and now, Cellectis has the
decision of whether to enter phase 2 or
not, given that it made
it through phase one.
And here you can see that
the maximum value for
Cellectis would be not to enter
into phase 2 litigation and
just take the $3 million loss, rather
than the chance at an $8 million loss.
We'll substitute the $3 million loss for
the decision node.
And we're finally at the first outcome,
which is whether the patent is valid or
not.
Here, in either case,
you can see the outcome is negative $3
million, so we'll substitute that value.
For the event node, and
now Cellectis has it's first decision,
that is whether to enter into
litigation at all or not.
And if it does, it will lose $3 million,
and if it doesn't, it will lose nothing.
So to maximize the outcome,
it will choose not to go into litigation.
And we see that Cellectis's
maxi-min strategy is
to not to enter into litigation at all.
The next set of strategies that we're
going to look at are maxi-max strategies.
Those are the opposite.
These are risk-seeking, or reward
seeking strategies that are intended to
maximize the maximum possible outcome
without regard to how bad things can get.
Begin, we're gonna start at the end
of the tree and work backwards.
At each event node we're now going
to choose the maximum outcome
rather than the minimum cuz we
wanna see how good things might be.
Then at each decision node, selectors will
choose the outcome maximizing decision.
And again we'll work
backwards towards the root.
So here's the decision tree.
We'll start at the end, and
we'll select the maximum event outcome.
So that in this case would be 41
million and we'll substitute that for
the event node, and now Cellectis must
decide whether to enter into phase 3,
if it makes it that far.
If it does, would have a maximum
outcome of 41 million.
If it doesn't, it would have a maximum
outcome of negative eight million.
So it's going to choose
to enter into phase 3.
We're going to substitute
the 41 million for
the decision node, and
now we're back to an event node.
Whether the patent was infringed or
not in phase 2.
And here, you can see the maximum outcome,
again would be $41 million.
So we'll substitute that for
the event node.
That's as good as things could get for
Cellectis.
And now Cellectis has a decision of
whether to enter into phase
2 if it makes it that far.
And you can see again that
if it makes it that far,
if it enters into phase 2 it
can earn up to 41 million.
And if it decides to stop at that point,
it would lose 3 millions.
So, again, the value maximizing decision
would be to enter into litigation.
And so we'll take that $41 million and
we'll substitute it for the decision node.
And, here, we're at the outcome of
the event of the Phase one of the trail,
determining whether the patent's valid or
not.
Again, we're going to select
the maximum event outcome,
which is $41 million, substitute it for
the event node, and finally,
Cellectis has a decision of whether
to enter into litigation at all.
If it does enter into litigation,
it would have the chance of
earning up to $41 million.
If it doesn't,
its gonna have the chance of earning zero.
So Cellectis in this case would
choose to enter into litigation.
And we see that to maximize
its maximum payout,
Cellectis should proceed through
all stages of litigation.
That's the only way it can
earn a positive payout.
And it has the chance of running up to
$41 million, if things work out for it.
[COUGH] So
we've seen the maxi-min set of decisions,
maximizing the minimum outcome is to
not enter into litigation at all.
And really,
at any stage of the litigation, to stop.
The maxi-max set of decisions to maximize
the maximum possible outcome, would be to
proceed through all stages of litigation
to have a chance at that $41 million.
Finally, we're going to look at
the expected value maximizing decision for
Cellectus.
Those are the risk neutral decisions
that place equal weight on good and
bad outcomes.
As before, we're going to start
with the tree's outcomes and
work backwards to its root.
At each event node, we're gonna calculate
the expected value of the outcome.
So that's the weighted
average of the outcomes.
We'll use the probabilities
as the weights.
At each decision node, then, we'll choose
the expected value maximizing decision.
So here we go again.
We're gonna start at the end, and we'll
calculate the expected value of phase
three of the trial where
we'll equally weight the $41,
$31, $21, and $11 million outcomes.
And when we calculate the expected value,
it's $26 million.
And we'll substitute that for
the event node.
So now, Cellectis must decide whether
to enter into phase three litigation,
given that it made it that far.
If it does,
the expected value is $26 million,
if it doesn't it's negative eight.
So Cellectis is going to choose to
continue litigation if it makes
it that far.
And we'll substitute the $26 million for
the decision node.
Again, we have an event node and
we're gonna calculate the expected value
of the two events which
would be if it wins phase 2,
ten the expected value from then
on out would be $26 million.
If it loses phase 2, then the expected
value is negative $8 million.
So we'll calculate according to those
probabilities of one-fourth and
three-fourths, the expected
value of the two outcomes, and
it's just a half a million.
We'll substitute the half a million in for
the event node and now Cellectis
needs to decide if it makes it to phase 2,
should it enter into phase 2 litigation.
If it does, the expected value's
a half a million, if it doesn't,
the expected value is negative $3 million.
So we'll decide, should it make it
to phase 2 to enter into litigation?
And we'll substitute the half million for
the decision node.
The last event is whether
Cellectis's patent will have
been decided to be valid or not.
And here, Cellectis needs to calculate
the expected value of the two outcomes.
If the patent's valid,
then the expected value for
Cellectis is a half million, if it is
invalid, it is negative $3 million.
And when we take the expected value across
those two outcomes, with two thirds and
one third probabilities, the expected
value is negative $0.67 million.
Will substitute the negative
$0.67 million for the event node,
and select this as first decision as
whether to enter into litigation at all.
If Cellectis does enter into litigation,
its expected value is negative
$0.67 million and
if it doesn't the expected value is $0.
In choosing to maximize the expected
value Cellectis would choose to not
enter into litigation at all.
And so, to maximize its expected value
Cellectis again would not
enter into litigation.
That's the same initial strategy
as the risk minimizing,
maxi/min strategy,
not to enter into litigation.
So what have we seen?
We built a decision tree.
We used decision nodes,
event nodes and outcomes.
We made sure that the probabilities
that each of the event nodes sum to one.
We added up the cash flows
from the roots of the tree
to each leaf to calculate
the appropriate pad at each leaf.
We then identified three strategies.
The maxi-min,
which is the risk minimizing strategy.
The maxi-max,
which is the reward maximizing strategy.
And the expected value maxing strategy,
which is risk neutral.
We saw that the initial maxi-min and
expected-value maximizing
decisions coincided.
In both cases, it was optimal not to
litigate and to collect no money.
The maxi-max strategy differed however.
To have a chance at collecting damages,
it had to continue through
all stages of litigation.
So, that's it for our review problem.
Now that you've got it under your belt,
it's time for you to go and
work a couple of practice problems
in preparation for the quiz.
Thanks.